# Networking

## Introduction

- A Computer Networking is a practice of connecting mutiple computing devices (like computers, servers, switches, routers, phones etc) so they can communicate, share data and use shared resources like printers, files or internet access. As its core computer network enables devices to `Send and Recieve Data using wired (Ethernet) or wireless (Wi-Fi) communication.`, `Access remote resources such as files or applications hosted on other machines` and `connect to internet which is the largest public network in the world`.

- We can simply say that a computer network is communication between two or more network interfaces. A network interface is a point of connection between computer and network. Generally it refers both hardware like (network card, Ethernet port or Wi-Fi adapter in our computer) and software configuration (like ip addresses, MAC Addresses, and protocols) that allows comminication over network. So we can say network interfaces is a door way to enter into computer network just like a door to enter into a room, a device needs a network interface to connect and talk to other devices.

- The components involved in a computer network are : Two or more computers or devices, Cables as link between the computers, A Network interfacing Card on each, Swiches, Routers etc.

- Generally there are different configured around the world which are LAN (Local Area Network), WAN (Wide Area Network), Internet (Public Network).

- So whenever you request a url in the browser, first browser resolves its DNS and finds the correct IP and requests the OS to connect to the IP. Then OS asks the network interface in the system which might be Ethernet cable or Wi-Fi Adapter to connect to that IP. Then network interface send request to router (via radio signal if it is Wi-Fi or through cables if it Ethernet) then router sends this request to ISP (Internet Service Provider) via mutiple networking devices. Then ISP sends this request to nearest sever of that IP and that server responds with requested data and data travels the same reverse path that request has been travelled initially.

## OSI Model

- People around the world uses computer network to comminicate with each other. For worldwide data comminication, systems must be developed in such as way that they are compatiable to commnicate with each other. There should be standard communication methods and devices. International Organization and Standardization (ISO) has developed this standard. This communication model is called as Open System Interconnection (OSI)

- The OSI (Open System Interconnection) model is a 7-layer framework that describes how data moves from one device to anothor across the network. Each layer has a specific job and communicates with the layers above and below it.

- The 7 layers in the OSI model are :

  **Application Layer (Layer 7)** : This is the closet layer to end user. Its not about the actual application (like google chrome), but about protocols that allows software to communicate over the network. When you open a website, your browser uses HTTP/HTTPs, which is an Application Layer Protocol. If you are using email, protocols like SMTP, POP3, or IMAP operate here. The application layer provides services such as file transfers, remote login, email, and web browsing. We can this layer is an interface where your software applications interact with the network.

  **Presentation Layer (Layer 6)** : This layer ensures the data sent from one system can be understood by another, despite differences in data formats, charecter encoding, or encryption. It tanslates data formats like JPEG, MP4, PDF, etc. It encrypts/decrypts your web data during HTTPS connections using protocols like SSL/TLS. It also compresses or decompresses data (e.g gzip websites). So if your browser is sending data securely, this layer handles encryption (so only intended recipient can read it) and ensures format is usable. We can this this layer as translater or interpreter between you and anothor party.

  **Session Layer (Layer 5)** : The session layer is responsible for establishment, maintainance, and termination of communication sessions between two devices. It opens a session (like temporary phone call) between your computer and server. It can sychronize data (e.g checkpoints during large transers). When you are watching a youtube video or downloading a file, it makes sure the session remains intact. We can think this layer as the one that keeps track of conversations between devices - who is taking to whom and when conversation ends etc.

  **Transport Layer (Layer 4)** : This layer is responsible for end-to-end communication and reliability. It breaks data into segments and numbers them so they can be reassembled.It ensures reliable delivery, meaning data arrives without errors, in the correct order and only once. The most common protocol is TCP (used for web browsing) and UDP (used for video streaming or gaming where speed > reliability). Ports also live here e.g. port 80 for HTTP, port 443 for HTTPs. We can think this layer as delivery service which tracks each box (segments) and ensures everything arrives correctly and on time.

  **Network Layer (Layer 3)** : The Network Layer decides how data routes from source to destination. It uses IP addresses to identify each device. It adds IP Headers to the data and routes data through various intermediate routers on the way to destination. Common protocols here : IP (Internet Protocol), such as IPv4 and IPv6. Routers operate at this layer. We can think of this layer as GPS and road system which figures out the best path to get your data from your laptop in new york to server in california.

  **Data Link Layer (Layer 2)** : The data link layer takes data from network layer and converts it into frames for transmission on physical network. Each frame contians a MAC address, which is the hardware address for a device's network card (e.g your wifi adapter). It uses ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) to find MAC Address for IPs on local network. It also handles error detection and flow control. Switches operate in this layer. This layer as local mail carrier  which is responsible for delivering mail from your house to nearest post office (your router) using street address (MAC address).

  **Physical Layer (Layer 1)** : This is the lowest layer. It Involves the actual transmission of binary data (0s and 1s) over a physical medium. It could be electrical signals on a wire (Ethernet), radio waves (Wi-Fi), or light pulses (fiber optic). This layer deals with cables, connectors, voltages, frequencies, and transmission rates. Our device Wi-Fi adapter, Ethernet Cables, network interface card (NIC) operates here. We can think this layer as truck or fiber cable that actually carries boxes (data) physically.

- Now lets see the main difference between IP addresses and MAC addresses. We understand the difference with an analogy. Suppose we are living in a community which has multiple flats numbering from 100 to 800. Generally people inside the community comminicate each other by using the flat numbers. They doesn't need the community address. Suppose if a person living outside wants to come to this community to meet a friend then he first need to know the community address to reach the community then he needs to know th flat number of his friend to reach his friend flat. Here we can think community address is IP address and flat numbers are MAC (Media Access Control) address. When ever some one outside of this network wants to access your network, then that device first sends request to the public address of the router which is the gateway to your netwrok (community) then router communicate your device by using MAC address. So we can say devices within a network communicates using MAC address. If devices from different network wants to communicate then we must need to use IP address. For global communication we need IP addresses and for local communication we need MAC address.

- **Example of OSI Model** : When you open the chrome, type `https://google.com` and hit enter then at application layer (7), chrome creates an HTTPS request to google server, then this request encrypted by TLS in presentation layer (6). Now a session is created between your computer and google's server by session layer (5). Now the request is split into TCP segments and each segment is assigned with sequence number by Transport Layer (4). Now network layer (3) adds a header with your IP and google servers IP to each segment. Now data link layer (2) attaches the MAC address of the device to each frame, so the frame can travel to router. Now at physical layer (1), the signal is transmited over Wi-Fi to your router, from there out of the internet.